# Personal accounting

## Mastering the noble art of saving is the foundation of financial
freedom*

<img src="media/image1.png" style="width:5.72086in;height:3.81391in" />

**Start tracking your cash flow**

Dear Lit investor,

as you probably know, before diving headfirst into the world of
investing, you should **master the noble art of saving** and this
article will tell you how I approached the subject.

Since I started working, I have always tried to track my income and
expenses, as I wanted to be sure I could start saving some money right
away. Not to be obsessive, but to be mindful of where my cash was
flowing.

To be completely honest, **at first I was quite obsessive**. Every
Sunday I would download all the transactions from my debit card (even
the tiniest daily expenses) and log them in an Excel spreadsheet, just
like a financial guru would recommend. However, after few months, I
realized that it was not really working – at least not for me. Recording
everything took too much time and made me **lose focus on what really
mattered**. Moreover, I was trying to maximize my savings by cutting out
small daily expenses that, in the grand scheme of things, didn’t really
make a difference, such as a €1.50 coffee on a Saturday morning at my
local café.

**Eventually, I found my method** (example table below). I would say
that it works for anyone who wants to track their spending without going
crazy: I record only recurring expenses, even if small (e.g. housing,
utilities and groceries), and discretionary purchases, only if
significant (e.g. fun & vacations and physical goods). I set a threshold
of €10, but you can adjust it however you want.

<img src="media/image2.emf" style="width:6.69306in;height:2.25694in" />

It works for me with very minimal effort. Once the system is in place,
it takes just 10 minutes per month and gives you a clear picture of your
main income and expense items. **Consistency, though, is the key**. In
no time, just the habit of keeping track of my cash flow has made me
more disciplined with my spending and more motivated to grow my income.

**How to save more**

But now let’s answer the question: “how can I save more?”. This calls
for breaking things down into short-term and long-term. For simplicity,
**let’s assume** **you are an employee** and these are you cash flows:

-   Income:

    -   Salary (grey): very sticky in the short term, but can increase
        dramatically over the years, thanks to promotions or job changes

    -   Side hustle (orange): quite sticky in the short term, can suffer
        seasonality and tends not to scale over time if it remains a
        “side project”

-   Expenses:

    -   Non-discretionary (blue): very sticky both in the short and in
        the long term.

    -   Discretionary (green): very flexible both in the short and in
        the long term.

<img src="media/image3.emf" style="width:6.69306in;height:2.25694in" />

As a result, the most effective way to save more **in the short term**
is to **cut discretionary expenses**. Without too many sacrifices, you
can switch from €120 Ralph Lauren shirts to tailor-made ones for half
the price. Sounds like a deal, right? By the way, to be honest I think
premium brands like Ralph Lauren have been losing a lot of their appeal
over the last few years while “no-brands” items have amazing
value-for-money.

On the other hand, **in the long term** it is best to focus on
**increasing your sources of income**, while trying not to inflate your
lifestyle too much. Not too much, but a little, yes. Otherwise, why put
in so much effort in saving money?

**Non-monetary benefits of saving money**

Of course, saving money gives us more room for future spending and
financial security for retirement (sensitive matter for us Europeans),
but practicing saving can be beneficial for other things too.

Saving reduces waste and helps us focus on the important things. Once
we’ve developed good spending habits, we end up **buying only what we
truly need** **or genuinely desire**, resisting the temptations of
instant gratification and compulsive shopping (sorry, Flying Tiger).

In “Fight Club”, they say that “the things we own end up owning us” and,
even if I may not fully agree, I still think that **the best purchase**
we can make with our savings **is the freedom to decide our next move**.
